----

CHAPTER VIII
OF THE ANALYTICAL ENGINE

The circular arrangement of the axes of the Difference Engine round large
central wheels led to the most extended prospects. The whole of arithmetic now
appeared within the grasp of mechanism. A vague glimpse even of an Analytical
Engine at length opened out, and I pursued with enthusiasm the shadowy vision.
The drawings and the experiments were of the most costly kind. Draftsmen of
the highest order were necessary to economize the labour of my own head;
whilst skilled workmen were required to execute the experimental machinery to
which I was obliged constantly to have recourse.

In order to carry out my pursuits successfully, I had purchased a house with
above a quarter of an acre of ground in a very quiet locality. My coach-house
was now converted into a forge and a foundry, whilst my stables were
transformed into a workshop. I built other extensive workshops myself, and had
a fire-proof building for my drawings and draftsmen. Having myself worked with
a variety of tools, and having studied the art of constructing each of them, I
at length laid it down as a principle—that, except in rare cases, I would
never do anything myself if I could afford to hire another person who could do
it for me.

The complicated relations which then arose amongst the various parts of the
machinery would have baffled the most tenacious memory. I overcame that
difficulty by improving and extending a language of signs, the Mechanical
Notation, which in 1826 I had explained in a paper printed in the “Phil.
Trans.” By such means I succeeded in mastering trains of investigation so vast
in extent that no length of years ever allotted to one individual could
otherwise have enabled me to control. By the aid of the Mechanical Notation,
the Analytical Engine became a reality: for it became susceptible of
demonstration.

Such works could not be carried on without great expenditure. The fluctuations
in the demand and supply of skilled labour were considerable. The railroad
mania withdrew from other pursuits the most intellectual and skilful
draftsmen. One who had for some years been my chief assistant was tempted by
an offer so advantageous that in justice to his own family he could scarcely
have declined it. Under these circumstances I took into consideration the plan
of advancing his salary to one guinea per day. Whilst this was in abeyance, I
consulted my venerable surviving parent. When I had fully explained the
circumstances, my excellent mother replied: “My dear son, you have advanced
far in the accomplishment of a great object, which is worthy of your ambition.
You are capable of completing it. My advice is—pursue it, even if it should
oblige you to live on bread and cheese.”

This advice entirely accorded with my own feelings. I therefore retained my
chief assistant at his advanced salary.

The most important part of the Analytical Engine was undoubtedly the
mechanical method of carrying the tens. On this I laboured incessantly, each
succeeding improvement advancing me a step or two. The difficulty did not
consist so much in the more or less complexity of the contrivance as in the
reduction of the time required to effect the carriage. Twenty or thirty
different plans and modifications had been drawn. At last I came to the
conclusion that I had exhausted the principle of successive carriage. I
concluded also that nothing but teaching the Engine to foresee and then to act
upon that foresight could ever lead me to the object I desired, namely, to
make the whole of any unlimited number of carriages in one unit of time. One
morning, after I had spent many hours in the drawing-office in endeavouring to
improve the system of successive carriages, I mentioned these views to my
chief assistant, and added that I should retire to my library, and endeavour
to work out the new principle. He gently expressed a doubt whether the plan
was possible, to which I replied that, not being able to prove its
impossibility, I should follow out a slight glimmering of light which I
thought I perceived.

source - http://www.fourmilab.ch/babbage/lpae.html
